THE WITCH’S APPRENTICE • by Elliott Gish
“I want to be a witch,” said the girl.
She was a young thing, plump and pale as milk, with watery eyes that barely qualified as blue. As ordinary-looking as it was possible for a child to be without turning invisible, Aelin thought.
“A witch, is it?” she said, thinking longingly of the tea she’d just poured.
The girl nodded. Her shoulders were visibly trembling. The old woman wondered how long she’d stood outside the cottage door, working up the courage to knock.
“If you go deep into the forest,” Aelin said, “where the trees are so thick they crowd out the sky, you’ll find the ruins of a palace. Years ago, a princess there was cursed to spew roses from her mouth every time she spoke. Over time they came so thick to her tongue that she could not eat, or even breathe, and so she died.”
“I heard that story before,” the girl said. “But it was toads and stones.”
Aelin glanced at her sharply. “Roses,” she repeated. “They still grow there in the ruins. Pick one, then bring it back to me.”
The girl opened her mouth as if to argue, but then thought better of it. With many a backwards glance, she started away from the cottage and quickly vanished in the trees. Aelin shut the door with considerable relief and went to drink her tea.
***
A week later, Aelin woke to rain pattering on her roof and a fist pounding at her door. She pulled on her shawl and lurched towards it, grumbling.
The girl stood on the front step, drenched and shivering. In her hand was a red rose, fiercely blooming.
“Huh,” said Aelin, rather surprised. “You found it, did you?”
The girl nodded, her teeth chattering violently.
“And you still want to be a witch?”
Another nod. Aelin briefly considered letting the girl in to dry herself but decided against it.
“Three leagues from here is a great lake,” she said, “so clear you can see right to its bed. At the bottom is a house made of reeds and lakeweed. The undine who lived there once loved a man who promised her a soul and his fidelity in exchange for certain favours; but he broke his word and married a wealthy merchant’s daughter. As revenge, the undine drowned them both on their wedding-night, claiming their wedding chalice as a trophy. It is there in her house under the water, chased in silver, studded with sapphires. Find it and bring it to me.”
The girl’s eyes widened. “But how will I reach it?” she asked. “I can’t swim.”
Aelin shrugged and reached out to pluck the rose from her hand. “You want to be a witch,” she said, stifling a yawn. “You figure it out.”
The girl began to walk away, then paused. “The undine shouldn’t have drowned the wife,” she said. “She didn’t do anything wrong.”
Without waiting for a reply, she trudged back into the forest with the grim determination of a soldier.
***
A month later, Aelin opened her door to sweep out the dust that had accumulated beneath her bed. The girl sat there, dirty and disheveled, her face drawn with weariness. The chalice gleamed in her hand.
“You managed, I see,” Aelin said, impressed despite herself. “Still want to be a witch?”
“Yes,” the girl replied simply. The want burned deep in her eyes.
“Beyond the forest is a mountain,” Aelin said, “so high its peak is veiled in cloud. At its foot is a tunnel leading into the heart of the earth, where a dragon sleeps. It once held a maiden captive there who awaited rescue by a knight. The knight never came, and in time the dragon ate her — all but her bones.”
“Why didn’t the knight come?” the girl asked, climbing unsteadily to her feet.
Aelin shrugged. “Who knows? Knights often don’t. Enter the dragon’s lair and bring back one of the maiden’s finger-bones.”
The girl bit her lip. “He may eat me,” she said, “or burn me to ash.”
“True enough,” Aelin agreed, plucking the chalice from her hand. “Off you go.”
She made a shooing gesture with her broom, but the girl did not move. She stood there, shoulders squared, eyes narrowed. She was still plump, still plain, still pale; and yet, suddenly, she looked far from ordinary.
“Why?” she asked.
Aelin raised an eyebrow. “Why?”
“Why?” the girl repeated. “You told me to bring you a rose from the forest, and I obeyed. You told me to bring you a chalice from the lake, and I obeyed. Now you want me to go where knights will not, face a dragon that eats girls, all to bring you a bone? Why? What possible use could you have for it?” She was shouting now. A flock of birds nearby took flight in protest.
Aelin studied her for a moment, thoughtfully tapping the side of her nose. Finally, she said:
“Come inside.”
The girl blinked, suddenly unsure. “What?”
“Come into my cottage. You want to be a witch, don’t you? We may as well begin now.” She smiled, reaching out to grasp the girl’s plump shoulder. “Child, don’t you see? A witch is not a woman who obeys, even if she does great deeds. A witch is a woman brave enough to ask ‘why.’”

CLOCKWORK SYMPHONY
Silas was the son of a watchmaker, but although he dutifully followed his father’s craft, he dreamed of becoming a musician instead. By day he toiled in the workshop, greasing gears, replacing springs and calibrating the minute mechanisms of the brass pocket watches that his father sold for a hefty sum. His skill with the watches was unparalleled, but he found no joy in it. In the evenings he played music. One month he’d practise the trumpet, the next it was the violin, then the clarinet, then the piano. At night he memorised scales and studied the great composers.
Silas’s father indulged his hobby and listened wistfully to many impromptu recitals when the working day was done. So it came as no surprise when Silas announced his intention to audition for the Duke of Lukenberg’s Orchestra, which comprised the finest musicians in the city.
“Just don’t be too disappointed if they don’t respond how you expect,” he said. “Who knows how music sounds to someone else’s ears?”
Silas was used to receiving such abstruse advice from his father, so he paid it little mind.
The audition took place in the grandest concert hall in the city: a vast room with tiered rows of seats reaching up to a painted roof, illuminated by modern electric lights. The conductor, impresario and principal violinist sat stiffly in the front row, waiting while Silas shuffled onto the stage.
“In your own time,” said the conductor, tapping the floor with his foot.
Silas brought the clarinet to his lips and started playing a difficult piece that he’d practised long and hard. Eight bars into the music, the principal violinist leaned across and whispered to the conductor, who waved at Silas.
“Thank you so much,” he said. “I think we’ve heard enough. Good day to you.”
Silas disassembled his clarinet and hurried off stage, crestfallen and embarrassed. He paused for a moment in the wings and caught some of his judges’ conversation.
“What was his name? Silas?”
“If only it were Silence.”
“Silence would’ve been easier on our ears!” Their laughter echoed in Silas’s ears long after he left the concert hall.
Over the next few weeks, he devoted himself to the workshop and avoided music altogether. A letter soon came bearing the Duke’s blue wax seal. It confirmed that his application had been unsuccessful and that he would not be eligible to audition for the orchestra again for five years.
Silas fell into a deep depression, his confidence shattered. The worst thing was that he didn’t know what he’d done wrong. Which parts of his technique needed improvement? What mistakes had he made?
One day he came across a remarkable instrument in a dusty second-hand shop: a self-playing piano. You fed a long roll of paper with many holes into the top and cranked a handle on the side. He was so enchanted that he used all the money he’d saved to buy the piano and bring it back to his father’s workshop. He took it to pieces and studied every component in detail.
He soon wondered whether any other instruments could be redesigned to play themselves. For months, he experimented. Though most of his attempts failed, he learned a great deal, and his ambition grew with his skill. He began sketching plans for a vast, interconnected machine that would be capable of replicating the sounds of an entire orchestra. The machinery would be housed within an enormous wooden box the size of a church organ. It would be driven by gears and springs and steam and contain an array of pipes, piano strings, drums, bellows and even a bell.
As Silas began construction, he was forced to relocate his rapidly expanding project to a crumbling, disused music hall on the edge of town. Word of his unusual project spread across the city. People started dropping by to watch the strange machine take shape. Some even offered to help. Soon a dozen craftspeople were working on various components, following Silas’s specifications.
Five years after he bought the self-playing piano, the machine was finally ready. Anticipation reached fever pitch. Newspapers hailed the first performance of the “Auto-Orchestra” and tickets changed hands for exorbitant prices. People filled every inch of the old music hall. The three grandees from the Duke’s orchestra were once again in the front row.
Silas had programmed the machine meticulously, using a more complex version of the perforated paper from the self-playing piano, but he was still very nervous. When the time came he walked onto the stage, bowed to the audience, pulled a lever and watched the machine come to life. Music filled the hall. It worked just as Silas had planned. But within a few seconds the music was drowned out by the noise coming from the audience. People were shouting and plugging their fingers into their ears and scrambling for the exits.
“What a dreadful din!”
“Is this a practical joke?”
Some ranted angrily, others snorted with laughter. Once again, Silas didn’t know what had gone wrong. What did they hear, that he couldn’t? He’d studied music all his life, yet what to him sounded beautiful was a discordant din to everyone else.
As the last audience members departed, Silas sat down and rested his chin on his chest, defeated.
***
The watchmaker found his apprentice slumped in a chair in the middle of the empty hall, still as a statue. Settling down beside him, he flipped the brass switch on the nape of his neck and set to work with his tools. Not for the first time, he wondered if he’d been wise to create this clockwork boy who dreamed of scales and symphonies. Would the music machine the boy had made one day have dreams of its own, and build instruments in its own image?
And so on, and on, into infinity.

THE THINGS THEY CANNOT SEE • by JT Gill
For Mom and Dad. Thank you for reading to me.
A Hundred Easy Lessons, and these have shaped me most.
On my fifth birthday, Mom gave me an imagination.
It was made up of dusty pages from old books, broadsword sticks, gun-shaped sandwiches, and sound effects. She boxed it up in a little package, and set it on the kitchen counter — a bright red bow tied on top.
I tore it open — scattering wrapping paper on the kitchen floor — and gaped when I saw inside.
Mom stood by smiling. “Happy birthday,” she said.
Minutes later, a horde of pirates with smoking beards and glinting cutlasses broke through the front door with a roar, and I only just had time to get Mom to safety before they reached the kitchen.
Eventually, I forced them out, and barricaded the entrance with our kitchen chairs.
“How does it work?” Mom asked.
I grinned, panting hard. “Great.”
But it was also exhausting.
It wasn’t that I minded saving a little girl from a three-eyed monster on the playground, jumping from my bed to avoid the beast beneath, or even telling Dad to swerve one night when we almost hit a werewolf. But it was taxing, always seeing things that others couldn’t.
On Halloween, I stumbled on a banshee hovering over our garden, and had to cover my ears and force myself to laugh until it glided away. When Dad came outside, asking what was the matter, I tried to explain, but eventually gave up when he couldn’t understand.
“Use your imagination,” I said.
“I lost mine at work,” he replied with a shrug.
Most adults seemed to be like Dad, always losing their imaginations at work. So I sought out friends who still had theirs.
In the summer my best friend Brian and I went down to the creek by Farmer Dean’s fields. There, the grass was long and the water was cool. We were building mud castles when a squad of Indian braves ambushed us in the shallows.
“Run!” I yelled, and we spent that afternoon fighting them off. The cool clear water grew murky with the mud.
As High School approached, Dad expressed concern.
He noticed how I spent our evening meals staring off into space, and afternoons after school running around in the backyard with Brian, and he formulated a solution:
“This summer you need to get a job,” he said one evening at dinner. “We didn’t raise you to be a daydreamer, Jack.”
Later, I heard him talking to Mom about responsibility. The whole thing annoyed me, so one April night, when Dad had to work late, I consulted with Mom. We sat on our front porch, the rain whispering softly in the front yard.
“I don’t know why Dad cares so much,” I told her. “People who get jobs just lose their imaginations. They don’t have any fun.”
She smiled at me, in that same kind way I had seen so many years before.
“There should be a balance,” she said. “Your imagination should never distract you from reality. It should enhance it — help you see things others can’t.”
I sighed. It felt as if no one understood. But I looked for work all the same, and found a job at Sumpter’s Hardware downtown. Brian and I both applied. We started at the beginning of June.
As frustrated as I was with Dad, it was a fun job, made far more bearable thanks to Brian. We worked hard for Mr. Sumpter, who perpetually wore jeans, cowboy boots, and a white mustache. After a few weeks, he said he trusted us enough to let us close the store by ourselves, information that caused my parents to beam with pride.
Closing was my favorite. While Brian swept the floor, I watched packs of velociraptors, bears, and even aliens smash through the front windows, bloodthirsty and dangerous. But every time, I forced their retreat, just like I had done for my mother with the pirates so many years ago.
It was a muggy evening in late July when I found the balance.
As usual, Brian was out on the floor, sweeping between the aisles. I stood behind the cash register counting the money.
Mr. Sumpter walked in, massaging his wrist. “Any big weekend plans, boys?”
I shook my head. Brian said something about mowing the lawn. Mr. Sumpter chuckled.
“What about you?” I asked, glancing up at him. His face was caught in a grimace, and it wasn’t hard to imagine him lying on the floor, clutching at his chest, filled with a failing heart.
“You should get that checked out,” I said, nodding to his hand. “Could be bad.”
Later that night, long after Brian and I had each gone home, the phone rang. Dad answered it, mumbling something about telemarketers, but when he hung up, he was silent.
“Mr. Sumpter had a heart attack,” he said.
Mom gaped.
“The doctor said they caught it just in time. He said the only reason Mr. Sumpter went was because you told him to go, Jack.”
That night, I understood. A gift is something to be used. A responsibility.
Now I am old. With a wife and two kids, this present reality is difficult to see beyond. It almost takes effort to see the things others cannot, like a herd of triceratops rumbling through the parking lot outside my office building, or the secretary, grieving silently over her divorce.
I think of the days when Brian and I were dodging Indians’ arrows down by cool creeks, and the reality of this world was but a shadow. I see those Indians still, but there is nothing quite so vivid as through the eyes of a child.
So every night before bed, I sit down to read with my own two children, crafting their imaginations. We add yellowing pages from old books, sticks that are broadswords, and a healthy dose of responsibility.